README.md, before:

# Sakai CLE

This is the source code for the Sakai CLE.

## Building

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/sakaiproject/sakai.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/sakaiproject/sakai)


To build Sakai you need Java 1.8 and Maven 3.2. Once you have clone a copy of this repository you can
build it by running:
```
mvn install
```

## Running

Sakai runs on Apache Tomcat 8. Download the latest version from http://tomcat.apache.org and extract the archive.
*Note: Sakai does not work with Tomcat installed via a package from apt-get, yum or other package managers.*

You **must** configure Tomcat according to the instructions on this page:
https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/BOOT/Install+Tomcat+8

When you are done, deploy Sakai to Tomcat:
```
mvn clean install sakai:deploy -Dmaven.tomcat.home=/path/to/your/tomcat
```

Now start Tomcat:
```
cd /path/to/your/tomcat/bin
./startup.sh && tail -f ../logs.catalina.out
```

Once Sakai has started up (it usually takes around 30 seconds), open your browser and navigate to http://localhost:8080/portal

## Licensing

Sakai is licensed under the [Educational Community License version 2.0](http://opensource.org/licenses/ECL-2.0) 

Sakai is an [Apereo Foundation](http://www.apereo.org) project and follows the Foundation's guidelines and requirements for [Contributor License Agreements](https://www.apereo.org/licensing).

## Contributing

See [our dedicated page](CONTRIBUTING.md) for more information on contributing to Sakai.

## Bugs

For filing bugs against Sakai please use our Jira instance: https://jira.sakaiproject.org/

## Nightly servers 
For testing out the latest builds go to the [nightly server page](http://nightly2.sakaiproject.org)

## Get in touch
If you have any questions, please join the Sakai developer mailing list: To subscribe send an email to sakai-dev+subscribe@apereo.org

To see a full list of Sakai email lists and other communication channels, please check out this Sakai wiki page:
https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/PMC/Sakai+email+lists

If you want more immediate response during M-F typical business hours you could try our Slack channels.

https://apereo.slack.com/signup

If you can't find your  "at institution.edu" on the Apereo signup page then send an email requesting access for yourself and your institution either to sakai-qa-planners@apereo.org or sakaicoordinator@apereo.org .

## Community supported versions

[Sakai 11.4](https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/DOC/Sakai+11+Release+Notes) is the recommended version for production use.

[Sakai 10](https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/DOC/Sakai+10+Release+Notes) is still supported. Please use the latest maintenance release of 10.7.

Sakai 2.9 and earlier are no longer supported by the community.

## Under Development
Sakai 12 is under development and expected to branch in the third or fourth quarter of 2017. Please note that originally we were targetting the first quarter of 2017 but decided to change our schedule for various reasons including scope change and taking into consideration that many institutions are still upgrading to Sakai 11 this year, 2017, so adoption cycles were a consideration.

## Accessibility
[The Sakai Accessibility Working Group](https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/2ACC/Accessibility+Working+Group) is responsible for ensuring that the Sakai framework and its tools are accessible to persons with disabilities. [The Sakai Ra11y plan](https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/2ACC/rA11y+Plan) is working towards a VPAT and/or a WCAG2 certification.

CKSource has created a GPL licensed open source version of their [Accessibility Checker](https://cksource.com/ckeditor/services#accessibility-checker) that lets you inspect the accessibility level of content created in CKEditor and immediately solve any accessibility issues that are found. CKEditor is the open source rich text editor used throughout Sakai. Whlie the Accessibility Checker, due to the GPL license, can not be bundled with Sakai, it can be used with Sakai and the A11y group has created [instructions](https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/2ACC/CKEditor+Accessibility+Checker) to help you.

## Community (contrib) tools
A number of institutions have written additional tools for Sakai that they use in their local installations, but are not yet in an official release of Sakai. These are being collected at https://github.com/sakaicontrib where you will find information about each one. You might find just the thing you are after!

Commit message:

Updated CLE name, added quickstart wiki link

README.md, after:

# Sakai Collaboration and Learning Environment (Sakai CLE)

This is the source code for the Sakai CLE.

## Building

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/sakaiproject/sakai.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/sakaiproject/sakai)

This is the "Mini Quick Start" for more complete steps to get Sakai configured please look at [this guide on the wiki](https://github.com/sakaiproject/sakai/wiki/Quick-Start-from-Source).

To build Sakai you need Java 1.8 and Maven 3.2. Once you have clone a copy of this repository you can
build it by running:
```
mvn install
```

## Running

Sakai runs on Apache Tomcat 8. Download the latest version from http://tomcat.apache.org and extract the archive.
*Note: Sakai does not work with Tomcat installed via a package from apt-get, yum or other package managers.*

You **must** configure Tomcat according to the instructions on this page:
https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/BOOT/Install+Tomcat+8

When you are done, deploy Sakai to Tomcat:
```
mvn clean install sakai:deploy -Dmaven.tomcat.home=/path/to/your/tomcat
```

Now start Tomcat:
```
cd /path/to/your/tomcat/bin
./startup.sh && tail -f ../logs.catalina.out
```

Once Sakai has started up (it usually takes around 30 seconds), open your browser and navigate to http://localhost:8080/portal

## Licensing

Sakai is licensed under the [Educational Community License version 2.0](http://opensource.org/licenses/ECL-2.0) 

Sakai is an [Apereo Foundation](http://www.apereo.org) project and follows the Foundation's guidelines and requirements for [Contributor License Agreements](https://www.apereo.org/licensing).

## Contributing

See [our dedicated page](CONTRIBUTING.md) for more information on contributing to Sakai.

## Bugs

For filing bugs against Sakai please use our Jira instance: https://jira.sakaiproject.org/

## Nightly servers 
For testing out the latest builds go to the [nightly server page](http://nightly2.sakaiproject.org)

## Get in touch
If you have any questions, please join the Sakai developer mailing list: To subscribe send an email to sakai-dev+subscribe@apereo.org

To see a full list of Sakai email lists and other communication channels, please check out this Sakai wiki page:
https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/PMC/Sakai+email+lists

If you want more immediate response during M-F typical business hours you could try our Slack channels.

https://apereo.slack.com/signup

If you can't find your  "at institution.edu" on the Apereo signup page then send an email requesting access for yourself and your institution either to sakai-qa-planners@apereo.org or sakaicoordinator@apereo.org .

## Community supported versions

[Sakai 11.4](https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/DOC/Sakai+11+Release+Notes) is the recommended version for production use.

[Sakai 10](https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/DOC/Sakai+10+Release+Notes) is still supported. Please use the latest maintenance release of 10.7.

Sakai 2.9 and earlier are no longer supported by the community.

## Under Development
Sakai 12 is under development and expected to branch in the third or fourth quarter of 2017. Please note that originally we were targetting the first quarter of 2017 but decided to change our schedule for various reasons including scope change and taking into consideration that many institutions are still upgrading to Sakai 11 this year, 2017, so adoption cycles were a consideration.

## Accessibility
[The Sakai Accessibility Working Group](https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/2ACC/Accessibility+Working+Group) is responsible for ensuring that the Sakai framework and its tools are accessible to persons with disabilities. [The Sakai Ra11y plan](https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/2ACC/rA11y+Plan) is working towards a VPAT and/or a WCAG2 certification.

CKSource has created a GPL licensed open source version of their [Accessibility Checker](https://cksource.com/ckeditor/services#accessibility-checker) that lets you inspect the accessibility level of content created in CKEditor and immediately solve any accessibility issues that are found. CKEditor is the open source rich text editor used throughout Sakai. Whlie the Accessibility Checker, due to the GPL license, can not be bundled with Sakai, it can be used with Sakai and the A11y group has created [instructions](https://confluence.sakaiproject.org/display/2ACC/CKEditor+Accessibility+Checker) to help you.

## Community (contrib) tools
A number of institutions have written additional tools for Sakai that they use in their local installations, but are not yet in an official release of Sakai. These are being collected at https://github.com/sakaicontrib where you will find information about each one. You might find just the thing you are after!
